**45 FROM LEH TO KHOTAN**

ten used as a camp by passing caravans and covered with carcasses and bones. We made only a brief halt and then started again in order to reach Baksum-Bulak. Balti-brangsa was situated at the foot of a low ridge, south of a shallow depression in the surrounding upland plain; the lowest point of the depression was occupied by a small lake.

A strong northwest wind was driving the clouds, and the ground was covered by several inches of snow that had fallen the night before. Late in the afternoon we reached Baksum-Bulak and camped on a level gravel plain. The surrounding mountains were all buried under snow, and an impenetrable mist made it impossible to ascertain the character of the neighborhood. In the evening we were joined by another trading caravan on its way to Kokyar and Karghalik; it had unusually fine pack animals and was traveling with great speed. The caravaneers were a fine lot of men who went about their daily occupations with a remarkable sense of duty.

The next march brought us across a series of upland plains covered here and there by patches of snow. On one of these plains, we suddenly scented in the cold air the thin perfume of Indian spices and saffron. We rode ahead and soon discovered a small donkey caravan, carrying loads of Indian spices from which the strong smell emanated. After an eight hours’ march we reached the junction of the Kokyar and Sanju routes. It is a vast gravel plain bordered on the north by a mighty snow mountain. Behind this snowy giant lay the summer grazing grounds of the mountain Kirghiz. The trading caravan, which had stayed with us at Baksum-Bulak, continued their journey toward the northwest and soon disappeared in the trembling atmosphere of the Asiatic highland. A violent northwest wind prevented the pitching of our camp and we had to wait until sunset, when its force abated a little.

October 2. Nazar Bai was eager to cross the Suget Pass (17,000 feet) the same day and to reach the Chinese frontier outposts of Suget Karaul as quickly as possible. We broke camp very early, about six o’clock in the morning, and plunged into the mountains across the plain. For several hours we followed the course of a small rivulet that flowed from the pass and disappeared in the gravel plain southwest of the massive eminence. The ascent to the pass was very gradual. The southern slope was free from snow. The landscape presented a succession of ridges, along the edge of which wound the path. The summit of the pass was broad and flat, covered with numerous bowlders. To the east and west rose great snowy peaks towering to a height of some 20,000 feet. Before

**46 TRAILS TO INMOST ASIA**

we had reached the summit of the pass, a violent cold wind accompanied by a snow blizzard greeted us. The surrounding moimtains disappeared behind a thick veil of mist, and one could only dimly see the men moving immediately ahead. On reaching the northern slope, we found it blocked by snow several feet deep. A trading caravan on mules was stranded on the edge, its drivers uncertain what next to attempt. There could not be any question about returning to the southern side of the pass; we had to find a path down the snow covered slope. After a brief consultation it was decided to unload the mules and send them down to find a suitable trail for the rest of the caravan. The hardy animals acquitted themselves of their task splendidly. Belly-deep in snow, they descended the steep slope and reached the narrow gorge at the foot of the pass. They were followed by our loaded caravan animals and ourselves. The air resounded with cries of "*Hash, hosh!*" and "*Kabhardah, Kabhar-dah!*" Horses stumbled, men crept behind them, holding on to the tails of the animals. Sometimes the moving column would send a huge block of snow down the slope. When we reached the foot of the pass and looked up, we saw the whole mountain side covered by a dark crawling string of pack animals and men. We were fortunate not to lose any of our animals or men during this dangerous crossing. Pre-occupied with the difficulties of the trail, we had no time to admire the severe mountain panorama that opened before us. Dark, almost black, jagged peaks, rimmed with sparkling snow, stood out in sharp contrast to the dismal gray sky. The wind was raging in the gorge at the foot of the pass, dispersing the snow in fantastic designs on the mountain slopes. "By the grace of God, we came down," shouted our Moslem caravan drivers, when we had reached the stony bottom.

Soon complete darkness enveloped the weathered rocks of the gorge. Nazar Bai rode ahead in search of a suitable grazinjg ground for the night, and his broad-shouldered figure mounted on his swift raven steed disappeared into the darkness. We continued marching until a very late hom. The men were murmuring and the animals were tired after the fatiguing struggle across the pass. My watch showed nine o’clock, then ten o’clock. Still no traces of Nazar Bai. The murmurs among the caravan drivers became louder. Was the old Nazar Bai mad to make men and animals march for more than twelve hours? It was getting impossible to ride because of the darkness. Myself and one of our syces went ahead of the caravan to find the trail. We went on foot, leading our horses behind us. Suddenly we found ourselves in water.

CROSSING THE KHARDONG LA

THE EXPEDITION CARAVAN BEFORE THE SUGET PASS

SANJU KIRGHIZ MEN AND WOMEN

TYPES OF TURKI NATIVES